
## Table of Contents

- [About](#about)
- [The openqa-webserver](#The-openqa-webserver)
    - [Host Directories for Webserver](#host-directories-for-webserver)
    - [Web Configuration](#web-configuration)
    - [Building openqa-webserver](#building-openqa-webserver)
    - [Start the openqa-webserver locally](#start-the-openqa-webserver-locally)
    - [Start the openqa-webserver as a service](#start-the-openqa-webserver-as-a-service)
    - [Login](#login)
    - [Loading Tests](#loading-tests)
- [The openqa-database](#The-openqa-database) 
- [The openqa-consumer](#The-openqa-consumer)  
    - [Host Directories for Consumer](#host-directories-for-consumer)
    - [Consumer Configuration](#consumer-configuration)
    - [Building openqa-consumer](#building-openqa-webserver)
    - [Start the consumer locally](#start-the-consumer-locally)
    - [Start the consumer as a service](#start-the-consumer-as-a-service)
    - [Scheduling Tests](#scheduling-tests)
- [The openqa-worker](#The-openqa-worker)
    - [Worker Configuration](#worker-configuration)
    - [Running workers](#running-workers)
    - [Stopping workers](#stopping-workers)

# About  
This repository contains scripts to build and run a containerized deployment of [openQA](https://github.com/os-autoinst).  The containers are specifically designed to leverage cloud resources and are customized to support [Fedora](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/OpenQA) release and update testing. 

# The openqa-webserver  

The openqa-webserver container runs an apache web server for the openQA user interface plus a reverse proxy for communicating with workers running the tests.

### Host Directories for Webserver
Make sure these subdirectories exist on the host in `openqa-webserver/`:  

* `tests/`: The script `init_openqa_web.sh` will either pull the full [os-autoinst-distri-fedora](https://pagure.io/fedora-qa/os-autoinst-distri-fedora) repository or just update it.
  
* `data/`: the PostgreSQL database where login information as well as test scheduling and results are stored
  
* `hdd/`: holds OS images for testing.  Sometimes the images will be downloaded from  `fedoraproject.org` but, in other cases, the images need to be generated on the host using Fedora's [createhdds](https://pagure.io/fedora-qa/createhdds).
> Note:  
>   - If the host machine isn't itself running Fedora, then `createhdds` can't be run and some, but not all, of the tests will fail to execute.  
>   - If the host machine is already virtualized as in a cloud instances, it must support nested virtualization, which you can check for by the presence of `/dev/kvm`  
>   - If copying the images generated by `createhdds` from another machine, keep them small by preserving sparse allocation. Don't use sftp or scp; instead, use:  
>     ```
>     rsync -avz --sparse fedora@171.1.1.1:<source dir> <dest dir>
>     ```

  Host packages necessary to run createhdds:  
  `sudo dnf install -y python3-libguestfs  libvirt-devel virt-install fedfind vim git edk2-ovmf`  
  Helper script to create images for hdd directory:  
  `./run_createhdds.sh`
      
* `iso/`: holds iso files for testing.
  
### Web Configuration    
In the `openqa-webserver/conf` subdirectory copy `client.conf.template` to `client.conf` and fill in host and api keys/secrets.

### Building Openqa Webserver
In the subdirectory `openqa-webserver/` run `build-webserver-image.sh`  

### Start the openqa-webserver locally
Run the ExecStart command from the `openqa-webserver.service` file  
> Note add to the podman run command the --detach or --tty option depending on whether you want to see the standard output

### Start the openqa-webserver as a service
```
sudo cp openqa-webserver.service /etc/systemd/system/
sudo loginctl enable-linger <user>
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start openqa-webserver
```

### Login
Login through the web UI using a Fedora Account.  
https://accounts.fedoraproject.org  

To create the first administrator in a new database, from within the openqa-webserver container:    
`su geekotest; /usr/share/openqa/script/create_admin fake_admin`  

### Loading Tests  
Manually login through the web UI, then load the tests from inside the openqa-webserver container:  
```bash
cd /var/lib/openqa/share/tests/fedora/;
./fifloader.py --load  templates.fif.json templates-updates.fif.json;
```
Reload the tests:  
```bash
cd /var/lib/openqa/share/tests/fedora/;
su geekotest -c "git pull";
./fifloader.py --load -u  templates.fif.json templates-updates.fif.json
```

# The openqa-database

# The openqa-consumer 

The openqa-consumer uses fedora-messaging to listen for new builds on the public fedora messaging service and schedules tests for those builds using fedora-openqa.  

[fedora-messaging](https://fedora-messaging.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)  
[fedora-openqa](https://pagure.io/fedora-qa/fedora_openqa)  

### Host Directories for Consumer
Make sure these subdirectories exist on the host in `openqa-consumer/`:    
`fedora-messaging-logs`  
`fedora-openqa`  

### Consumer Configuration

* In the `openqa-consumer/conf` subdirectory, make a copy of `client.conf` from `client.conf.template` and fill in the host and api keys/secrets.  This will authorize `fedora-openqa.py` to schedule tests.  
> Warning: don't use `127.0.0.1` or `localhost`, even if running locally, since this would be the container's localhost.  

* Also in the `openqa-consumer/conf` subdirectory, make a copy of `fedora_openqa_scheduler.toml` from `fedora_openqa_scheduler.toml.template`.
    - Configure the `openqa_hostname`  if not using the default `openqa.fedorainfracloud.org`  
    - Optionally, edit to include/exclude the kinds of messages to listen for.  It's not necessary to change the queue ids, because `/init_openqa_consumer.sh` will automatically change the uuid and in the config each time the consumer is run.
 
If running without https make sure to tell OpenQA_Client to use http
```bash
source /venv/bin/activate
schedule_path="/fedora-openqa/src/fedora_openqa/schedule.py"
sed -i 's/client = OpenQA_Client(openqa_hostname)/client = OpenQA_Client(openqa_hostname, scheme='"'"'http'"'"')/' $schedule_path
```
then manually reinstall fedora-openqa
```bash
pip uninstall fedora-openqa;
pip install /fedora-openqa;
```
### Building openqa-consumer  
`build-consumer-image.sh`    

### Start the consumer locally
Run the ExecStart command available in the `openqa-consumer.service` config.  
> Note add to the podman run command the --detach or --tty option depending on whether you want to see the standard output

### Start the consumer as a service
```bash
sudo cp openqa-consumer.service /etc/systemd/system/
sudo loginctl enable-linger fedora
sudo systemctl daemon-reload
sudo systemctl start openqa-consumer
```

### Scheduling Tests

The openqa-consumer container will schedule tests automatically.  To schedule tests manually get a BUILDURL from the "Settings" tab of any test by clicking through the test's coloured dot [https://openqa.fedoraproject.org/](https://openqa.fedoraproject.org/):   

```bash
podman exec -it openqa-consumer /bin/bash
source /venv/bin/activate
fedora-openqa fcosbuild -f  https://builds.coreos.fedoraproject.org/prod/streams/testing-devel/builds/39.20240401.20.0/x86_64
fedora-openqa compose -f https://odcs.fedoraproject.org/composes/odcs-29778
fedora-openqa compose -f https://kojipkgs.fedoraproject.org/compose/rawhide/Fedora-Rawhide-20240401.n.0/compose
```
Alternatively, tests can also be schduled manually with `openqa-cli`, but using this tool requires a manual check of the variables expected by the tests as set out in `os-autoinst-distri-fedora/templates.fif.jsontemplates.fif.json`.  
For example, these commands schedule two tests that must be run in parallel:  

```bash
openqa-cli api -X POST isos \
ARCH=x86_64 \
BUILD=Fedora-Rawhide-20240206.n.0 \
UP1REL=39 \
DISTRI=fedora \
FLAVOR=universal \
TEST=upgrade_server_domain_controller \
VERSION=Rawhide

openqa-cli api -X POST isos \
ARCH=x86_64 \
BUILD=Fedora-Rawhide-20240206.n.0 \
UP1REL=39 \
DISTRI=fedora \
FLAVOR=universal \
TEST=upgrade_realmd_client \
VERSION=Rawhide
```

Use openqa-cli to cancel jobs:  
```bash
for JOB_ID in {226..342}; do openqa-cli api -X POST jobs/$JOB_ID/cancel; done
```

# The worker container

### Worker Configuration    
|                           client.conf    |    |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
|`[172.31.1.1]`                                | The openqa-webserver host. Authorizes workers to carry out tests.      |

|                            workers.ini    |    |
|----------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| `HOST = http://172.31.1.1:8080`                                | The openqa-webserver host. It's wrong to use `localhost` since this is the container's localhost.       |
| `WORKER_HOSTNAME = 172.31.1.1`                                 | For developer mode: the worker's location for receiving livelog. |
| `AUTOINST_URL_HOSTNAME = 172.31.1.1`                           | For logging: the worker's location for receiving qemu logs.   |


### Running workers     
For example, this command runs three workers:  
`./openqa_worker.sh -n 3` 

If a test needs a specific `WORKER_CLASS` set the worker class like this:  
`./openqa_worker.sh -n2 -c qemu_x86_64,vde_Fedora-CoreOS-41.20240302.91.0`  

There are options for using local repositories for debugging, e.g.:  
`./openqa_worker.sh -n2 -c qemu_x86_64,vde_Fedora-CoreOS-41.20240305.91.0 -g ../../os-autoinst`  

### Stopping workers     
`./openqa_worker.sh -n 0`  
>The workers need to tell the openqa-webserver that they are stopping and will no longer be available to accept tests.  If the workers are not stopped gracefully, the openqa-webserver will slow down substantially as it continues to send tests to unavailable workers.  


